<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<dl>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Alesha</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an intimate form of Alexander. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Arshin</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>equals 2½ feet (approximately).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Baba</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a peasant woman (old).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Barin</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>Sir or Master.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Barinia</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>Ma’am or Mistress.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Chinovnik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>the generic name of all officials, but more usually applied to the smaller class of Government officials. Is often used in contempt.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Dessiatine</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>equals 2.70 acres.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Droshky</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a small open four-wheeled hackney-carriage.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Dvornik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a yard porter. Each house has one or more dvorniks, whose duties are to cut and carry firewood, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> They are also responsible for the cleanliness of the street and pavement immediately adjoining the house, and must assist the police.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Dvu-grivennik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a silver coin of the value and size of sixpence.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Euprakseiushka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a character in early Russian history.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Fortochka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a framed pane of glass in a window. It is on hinges, and can be opened for ventilation purposes when the window itself is hermetically sealed up for the winter.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Gorodovoi</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a policeman.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Ilia Murometz</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a character in early Russian history.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Ispravnik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a provincial police officer.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Izvoschik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a cabman; used indifferently to mean the man or his conveyance.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Kaftan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a three-quarters length overcoat, usually of leather lined with sheepskin.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Koliaska</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>See Droshky.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Kopeck</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a copper coin of the size and value of a farthing.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Krasnoe Solnishko</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>(beautiful sun), a famous early ruler of Russia, and the first of them to embrace Christianity.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Lineika</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a four-wheeled conveyance usually seating ten or twelve persons who ride back to back as in an Irish car.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Masha</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an intimate form of Maria or Mary. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Mateik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>the name of an artist.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Miatel</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a blizzard.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Miekoff</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an action in the last Polish Rebellion.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Moujik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a Russian peasant (man). Often used to mean a boor or uncouth person.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Nada, Nadia</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>intimate forms of Nadejda. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Names</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>Every Orthodox Russian has but one Christian name and a patronymic in addition to his surname, which last is not used in conversation. In the case of a man, the patronymic is formed by adding -ovich to his father’s name, or -ovna in the case of a woman. Thus, a man christened Ivan whose father bore the same name would be known as Ivan Ivanovich, Similarly, a woman christened Olga whose father’s name was Ivan would be known as Olga Ivanovna. In addition to the above there are variations of the Christian name used only by relatives and intimate friends, such as Vasia or Vassenka, intimate forms of Vassilli, Nada or Nadia, intimate forms of Nadejda. Thus, a man whose full name was Simon Ivanovich Spiridoff might be addressed as such, or Simon Spiridoff, or as Simon Ivanovich, or Simon Ivanich, or Senia, or Senichka, dependent on the relations between the two persons.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Opatoff</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an action in the last Polish Rebellion.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Pechenegs</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a tribe of Turkish origin which early settled itself in Russia.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Poltinik</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a silver coin of the value and size of a shilling.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Pood</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>equals 36 pounds avoirdupois.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Pristaff</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a pohce superintendent.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Prorub</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a hole cut out in the ice.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Rouble</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a silver coin of the value and size of a florin.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Russ</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>the ancient name of Russia.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Sajene</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>equals 7 English feet.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Samovar</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a tea-urn in which the water is boiled and kept hot by charcoal.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Sasha</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an intimate form of Alexander or Alexandra. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Semiradski</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a Russian artist.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Senia, Senichka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>intimate forms of Simon or Simeon. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Shuba</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a fur-lined overcoat of full length.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Sonia</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>an intimate form of Sophia. See Names.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Sotnia</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a squadron of cavalry (applied to Cossack troops only).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt>
					<dfn>Traktir</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd>
					<p>a humble kind of eating-house frequented by the working classes.</p>
				</dd>
			</dl>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
