<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Meeting</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-meeting" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Meeting</h2>
			<p>A broad, trembling silvery band of moonlight stretched away for tens of versts. The remaining expanse of the sea was black, and the regular dull noise of the waves as they broke and rolled along the sandy shore reached the person standing on the cliff high above. Even more black than the sea itself were the gently rocking silhouettes of the vessels in the roadstead. One huge steamer (“Probably English,” reflected Vassili Petrovich), within this bright strip of moonlight, was noisily blowing off steam in a series of small clouds, which dissolved as they lightly rose into the air. A moist, brine-laden breeze was coming from the sea. Vassili Petrovich, who had seen nothing of this kind previously, gazed rapturously at the sea, the moonlit strip, the steamers and sailing vessels, and, for the first time in his life, with a feeling of pleasure inhaled the sea air. He long gave himself up to the delights of this new sensation, turning his back on the town to which he had only this day come, and in which he was to spend many, many years. Behind him a heterogeneous crowd were promenading along the boulevard, whence could be heard scraps of Russian and other languages, the decorous, subdued conversation of local dignitaries mingling with the chatter of young girls, and the loud, merry voices of grownup schoolboys, as they strolled past together in knots of twos and threes. A burst of laughter from one of these groups made Vassili Petrovich turn round. As it passed him, one of the youths was saying something to a young girl, whilst his comrades noisily interrupted his passionate and apparently apologetic speech.</p>
			<p>“Don’t believe him, Nina Petrovna! It is all lies! He is making it up!”</p>
			<p>“But truly, Nina Petrovna, I am not in the least to blame.”</p>
			<p>“If you, Shevyreft, ever again dream of deceiving me⁠ ⁠…” said the girl stiffly, in a quiet young voice.</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich lost the rest of the sentence as the speakers passed out of hearing. But a second later a further burst of laughter resounded in the darkness.</p>
			<p>“This is the field of my future labours, in which, as the ‘modest ploughman, I shall work,’ ” mused Vassili Petrovich, first because he had been appointed teacher in the local gymnasium, and secondly, because he was fond of figurative forms of thought, even when not expressed aloud.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I must perforce toil in this modest field,” he reflected, sitting down on a bench with his face to the sea. “Where are the dreams of a professorship, of being a publicist, of a great name? You haven’t it in you, friend Vassili Petrovich, to carry out all these fine plans. We’ll try work here.”</p>
			<p>And beautiful and pleasant thoughts passed through the brain of the new schoolteacher. He thought of how he would discover the “spark divine” in the boys. How he would help those natures “striving to divest themselves of the chains of darkness.” How, finally, his pupils in due course would become men of note.⁠ ⁠… In his imagination he even pictured himself, Vassili Petrovich, sitting, an old, grey-haired teacher, in his modest lodging, and being visited by his former scholars⁠—one a professor of such and such a University, a man of renown in Russia and in Europe; another, an author, a well-known novelist; a third, a statesman also famous⁠—all of them treating him with respect. “It is the good seed sown by you, dear sir, when I was a boy, that has made me the man I am,” the statesman would say to Vassili Petrovich, warmly pressing the hand of his old tutor.</p>
			<p>However, Vassili Petrovich did not long occupy himself with such exalted reflections. His thoughts soon turned to matters directly concerning his present situation. He drew a new pocketbook from his pocket, and counting over his money, commenced to calculate as to how much would remain after payment of all necessary expenses. “What a pity I was so extravagant en route!” thought he. “Lodgings⁠ ⁠… we’ll say twenty roubles a month, board, washing, tea, tobacco.⁠ ⁠… I shall save a thousand roubles in six months, anyhow. I am sure to be able to get lessons here at four, or even five, roubles each.⁠ ⁠…” A feeling of satisfaction took him, and he became possessed of a desire to feel in his pocket where two letters of recommendation to local “bigwigs” lay, and for the twentieth time to read their addresses. He pulled out the letters, carefully unfolded the paper in which they were wrapped, but was unable to read the addresses as the moonlight was not bright enough to admit of such satisfaction. A photograph was wrapped up with the letters. Vassili Petrovich turned it straight to the light of the moon, and endeavoured to look at the well-known features. “Oh, my darling Lise!” he murmured almost out loud, and sighed, not without a feeling of pleasure. Lisa was his fiancée, whom he had left behind in Petersburg, waiting until Vassili Petrovich should accumulate the thousand roubles which the young couple deemed necessary before setting up house.</p>
			<p>Heaving a sigh, he hid the photograph and letters in the left side-pocket of his coat, and commenced to dream of his future married life. And these dreams were even more pleasurable than those about the statesman who was to come and thank him for the good seed sown in his heart.</p>
			<p>The sea fumed far away below him and the wind became fresher. The English steamer had disappeared from the strip of moonlight which was shining with a brilliancy melting into a thousand shimmering soft lights, and stretching far away over a seemingly endless expanse of water. Vassili Petrovich was loath to rise from his seat, to tear himself away from this picture and to return to the stifling atmosphere of the little room in the hotel at which he was stopping. However, it was now late, so he got up and went along the boulevard.</p>
			<p>A gentleman in a light suit of greyish alpaca and a straw hat with a muslin pugaree (the summer costume of the local beaux), rose from a bench as Vassili Petrovich passed, and said:</p>
			<p>“Can you give me a light?”</p>
			<p>“With pleasure,” replied Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>The red glow of the flame lit up a familiar face.</p>
			<p>“Nicolai, my good chap. Is it you?”</p>
			<p>“Vassili Petrovich?”</p>
			<p>“The same.⁠ ⁠… Ah, how glad I am! I never thought of this, never dreamt of it!” said Vassili Petrovich, embracing his friend heartily. “What fate has brought you here?”</p>
			<p>“That’s simply explained⁠—my work. And you?”</p>
			<p>“I have been sent here as teacher in the gymnasium. I have only just arrived.”</p>
			<p>“Where are you staying? If at an hotel, come along with me. I am glad to see you. You can scarcely have any acquaintances here? Come with me, we will have some supper and talk over old times.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, let us,” assented Vassili Petrovich. “I shall be delighted. I came here as if into a wilderness⁠—and suddenly this happy meeting. ‘<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Izvoschik</i>!’ ” he called.</p>
			<p>“Don’t; there is no need to call an <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">izvoschik</i>,” said Vassili’s friend, as he in turn called out “Sergei,” and a smartly turned out <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">koliaska</i> drove up to the kerb. The friend jumped in, but Vassili Petrovich remained standing on the pavement, and looked with bewilderment at the carriage, the black horses, and the portly coachman.</p>
			<p>“Kudriasheff, are the horses yours?”</p>
			<p>“Mine, mine. What? You didn’t expect it?”</p>
			<p>“Wonderful.⁠ ⁠… Can it be you?”</p>
			<p>“Well, who else if not me? But get in, and we will talk afterwards.”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich got in, sat himself by the side of Kudriasheff, and the <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">koliaska</span> rolled over the cobbles. Vassili Petrovich, as he sat comfortably on the soft cushions, smiled. “What does it mean?” he thought. “Not long ago Kudriasheff was the poorest of students, and now⁠—a <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">koliaska</span>!” Kudriasheff, stretching out his legs, placed them on the seat opposite, said nothing, but smoked his cigar. In five minutes’ time the carriage stopped.</p>
			<p>“Well, friend, we have arrived. I will show you my humble abode,” said Kudriasheff, stepping down and helping Vassili Petrovich to get out of the carriage.</p>
			<p>Before entering his “humble abode,” the guest cast a glance at it. The moon was behind it, and did not light it up, so that he was only able to note that the “abode” was a one-storied building with some ten or twelve large windows. A portico with spiral columns picked out with gold hung over a heavy wooden door, in which was inserted a looking-glass. The handle was of bronze in the form of a bird’s claw, which held an irregularly shaped piece of crystal. And a shining brass plate, bearing the owner’s name, was affixed to the door.</p>
			<p>“Your ‘humble abode,’ Kudriasheff! It is a palace,” said Vassili Petrovich, as they entered the hall with its oak furniture and polished black fireplace. “Is it really your own?”</p>
			<p>“No, my dear chap, I haven’t got to that yet. I rent it. It is not expensive⁠—one thousand five hundred roubles.”</p>
			<p>“One thousand five hundred roubles!” gasped Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>“It is better to pay one thousand five hundred roubles than to spend capital which will give far higher interest if not converted into real estate. Yes, and it means a lot of money if you really build, not like this trash.”</p>
			<p>“Trash!” exclaimed Vassili Petrovich perplexedly.</p>
			<p>“Yes, the house is nothing grand. But come along.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich hurriedly took off his overcoat and followed his host. The general style in which the house was furnished gave him fresh food for amazement. A whole series of lofty rooms with parquet floors and expensive wallpapers with patterns of gold. The dining-room was furnished in oak with crude models of birds hanging on the wall, an enormous carved sideboard, and a large round dining-table, which was flooded with light thrown from a hanging bronze lamp ornamented with a dead white shade. In the lounge there was a grand piano, a quantity of furniture of all kinds⁠—sofas, stools, chairs, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Expensive prints and villainous oleographs hung on the walls in gilded frames. The drawing-room had the customary silk upholstered furniture, and was crowded with numberless unnecessary things. It gave the impression that the owner had suddenly become wealthy⁠—had won two hundred or three hundred thousand roubles⁠—and had hurriedly furnished his house on a lavish scale. All had been purchased at one time, and purchased not because it was wanted, but because the money was burning his pocket, and found an outlet in the purchase of a grand piano, on which, so far as Vassili Petrovich knew, Kudriasheff could only play with one finger; of the horrible old painting to which probably none paid the slightest attention⁠—one of the tens of thousands which are attributed to some second-class Flemish master; of chessmen of Chinese work, so fine and ethereal that it was impossible to play with them, and on the heads of each of which were carved three balls, and of scores of other unnecessary articles.</p>
			<p>The friends went into the study. Here it was more comfortable. A large writing-table, equipped with various bronze and china knickknacks, and littered with papers, plans, and drawing implements, occupied the middle of the room. Huge coloured plans and geographical charts hung on the walls, and below them stood two low Turkish divans with silk cushions. Kudriasheff, taking Vassili Petrovich by the waist, led him straight to a divan, and sat him on the soft pillows.</p>
			<p>“Well, I am very glad to meet an old comrade,” said he.</p>
			<p>“And I also.⁠ ⁠… Do you know what⁠—to arrive here as if in a wilderness, and suddenly to meet⁠ ⁠… Do you know, Nicolai Constantinovich, meeting you has so stirred my mind, has raised so many recollections⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Of what?”</p>
			<p>“How of what? Of our student days, of the time when we lived so well, if not in a material sense, at least morally speaking.⁠ ⁠… Do you remember⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Remember what? How you and I used to devour sausages made of dog? Enough, my friend; it bores me. Will you have a cigar? ‘Regalia Imperiala,’ or some such name⁠—I forget what. I only know that they cost a <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">poltinik</i> each.”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich took one of the proffered treasures, took a penknife out of his pocket, cut the end off, lit the cigar, and said:</p>
			<p>“Nicolai Constantinovich, I feel absolutely in a dream. A few years⁠—and you have got to such a position!”</p>
			<p>“What position? It’s worth nothing.”</p>
			<p>“But why? How much do you get?”</p>
			<p>“What? Salary?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, pay.”</p>
			<p>“As engineer and Provincial Secretary Kudriasheff (2nd) I receive a salary of one thousand six hundred roubles a year.”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich’s eyes dilated.</p>
			<p>“But how⁠ ⁠… Where does all this come from?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my friend, what simplicity! Where? Out of water and earth, sea and dry land. But chiefly from here.”</p>
			<p>And he tapped his forehead with his finger.</p>
			<p>“Do you see those drawings hanging on the walls?”</p>
			<p>“I see them,” replied Vassili Petrovich, “and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Do you know what they are?”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t,” and Vassili Petrovich got up from the divan and went up to the wall. The blue, red, brown and black shades conveyed nothing to him, any more than the mysterious figures above the fine lines, drawn in red ink.</p>
			<p>“Plans, of course they are plans; but of what?”</p>
			<p>“Really, I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“These plans represent, my very dear Vassili Petrovich, a future mole. Do you know what a mole is?”</p>
			<p>“Well, of course. You must remember I am a teacher of the Russian language. A mole is⁠—well, a dam. What?”</p>
			<p>“Precisely, a dam. A dam for the formation of an artificial harbour. On these drawings is the plan of the mole which we are now constructing. You saw the sea from above where you were standing?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly. A wonderful picture! But I did not notice any kind of construction.”</p>
			<p>“It is difficult to notice it,” said Kudriasheff, laughing. “Scarcely any of this mole, Vassili Petrovich, is in the sea. It is almost all here on dry land.”</p>
			<p>“Where?”</p>
			<p>“Where, here in this house, and at the houses of the other engineers⁠—Knobloch, Puitsikovsky, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This is, of course, between ourselves. I am talking to you as an old friend. Why are you staring at me in that way? It is a common occurrence.”</p>
			<p>“But really, this is awful! Surely you are not telling the truth? Are you really not above such unclean methods for obtaining this comfort? Has the past only resulted in bringing you to this⁠ ⁠… this? And you talk quite calmly of this⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Stop, stop, Vassili Petrovich! No strong words, if you please. You talk of ‘dishonourable methods’? Tell me first what is meant by honourable and dishonourable. I myself do not know. Perhaps I have forgotten, but I didn’t try to remember, and it seems to me you yourself do not remember, only pretend you do. But let us drop the subject. First of all, it is not polite. Respect freedom of judgment. You talk of⁠—dishonour. Talk if you like, but don’t swear at me. I do not swear at you because your opinions differ from mine. The whole matter, my dear friend, lies in the view, the point of view, and as there are many points of view, let us drop this matter and go to the dining-room, where we will have some ‘vodka,’ and talk on pleasanter subjects.”</p>
			<p>“But, Nicolai, Nicolai, it hurts me to look at you.”</p>
			<p>“Well, let it hurt as much as you like. Let it hurt. It will pass away. You will grow accustomed to it. You will look at it and will say, ‘What a simpleton I am!’ Yes, you will say it, remember my words! Come along, let us go and have a drink and forget about erring engineers. That’s why a man has brains, in order to go astray.⁠ ⁠… Well, my dear tutor, how much are you going to get?”</p>
			<p>“It is all the same to you.”</p>
			<p>“Well, for instance?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I earn three thousand roubles with private lessons.”</p>
			<p>“There you are! For a paltry three thousand to drag out your whole life in giving lessons! And I sit here and look around. If I wish⁠—I drink. If I don’t wish, I don’t. If the fancy came into my head to spit at the ceiling all day long, I could afford to do it. And money⁠—so much money that it⁠—‘is dross for us.’ ”</p>
			<p>When they went into the dining-room, they found everything ready for supper. The cold roast beef looked like a rosy mountain. There were pots of jam displaying a variety of English names and labels. A whole row of bottles raised their heads from the table. The friends drank a wineglass or so of vodka each, and consumed their supper. Kudriasheff ate slowly and with relish. He was absolutely absorbed in his occupation.</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich ate and thought, thought and ate. He was greatly perplexed, and could not make up his mind what to do. Acting on his principles, he ought at once to leave his old friend’s house and never look at it again. “All this is really stolen,” he reflected, as he placed a piece of meat in his mouth, and sipped the wine poured out by his host; “and is it not disgraceful of me to be here eating and drinking it?” Many such thoughts passed through the brain of the poor teacher, but they remained thoughts, and behind them hid a certain secret voice which annexed each thought by “Well, and what then?” and Vassili Petrovich felt that he was not able to decide this question, and remained seated. “Well, I will watch,” flashed through his brain in self-justification, followed by a sense of confusion mingled with shame. “Why should I observe? Am I a writer or what?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, what meat!” commenced Kudriasheff. “Take note of it; you will not get anything like it throughout the town.” And he related to Vassili Petrovich a long story of how he had dined at Knoblochs’, and had been astonished by the beef there, and how he had found out where it could be got, and had eventually succeeded in getting it. “You have come just in the nick of time,” he said, by way of conclusion of his story about the meat. “Have you ever eaten anything approaching it?”</p>
			<p>“It is certainly excellent beef,” replied Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>“Magnificent, my dear chap! I like everything to be as it ought to be. But why aren’t you drinking? Wait a moment, I will pour you out some wine.”</p>
			<p>An equally long story of the wine followed, in which there figured an English ship’s captain, a commercial house in London, and the same Knobloch and the Customs. As he talked about his wine, Kudriasheff drank it, and as he drank he became more excited. Bright spots appeared on his pallid cheeks, and his speech became more rapid and vehement.</p>
			<p>“But why are you so silent?” asked he of Vassili Petrovich, who, as a matter of fact, had preserved a stubborn silence whilst listening to the panegyrics on meat, wine, cheese, and the other delicacies adorning the engineer’s table.</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, I don’t want to talk.”</p>
			<p>“Not want to? Bosh! I see you are still thinking about my confession. I am sorry, very sorry, I told you anything about it. We should have supped together with the greatest satisfaction but for this infernal dam.⁠ ⁠… Better not to think about it, Vassili Petrovich⁠—put it aside⁠ ⁠… eh? Vassenka, have done with it! What is to be done, old chap? I have not realized your hopes. Life is not a school. Yes, and I don’t know whether you will stick to your path long.”</p>
			<p>“I beg you not to make conjectures about me,” said Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>“Offended?⁠ ⁠… Of course, you won’t stick to it. What has your disinterestedness given you? Are you really contented now? Do you really never think every day as to whether your acts are in keeping with your ideals, and are you not convinced every day that they are not? Am I not right, eh? But drink, it is good wine.”</p>
			<p>He poured himself out a glassful, held it up to the light, sipped it, smacked his lips, and drank it.</p>
			<p>“Look here, my dear friend, do you think that I do not know what you are thinking of at the present moment? I know exactly. ‘Why,’ you are thinking, ‘am I sitting here with this man? Is he necessary to me? Can I really not get on without his wine and cigars?’ Listen⁠—listen, let me finish. I do not for one moment imagine that you are sitting here only for my wine and cigars. Not at all. Even if you were in great need of them, you would not sponge on me. Sponging is a very burdensome thing. You are sitting here and talking with me simply because you cannot make up your mind as to whether or not I am really a criminal. Do I not disturb you, and that’s all? Of course, it is very offensive to you, because you have certain convictions divided up under various headings in your head, and under them, I, your former comrade and friend, appear a scoundrel. At the same time you cannot feel any hostility towards me. Convictions are convictions, but I by myself am your comrade, and I may even say a good chap. You know yourself that I am incapable of offending anyone.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Wait a moment, Kudriasheff. Where have you got all this from? You yourself say it is not yours.” Vassili Petrovich waved his hand. “The person from whom you have stolen is the offended party.”</p>
			<p>“It is easy to talk about the person from whom I have stolen. I think, and think, as to whom I have offended, but I cannot understand whom. You do not understand how this business is arranged. I will tell you, and then perhaps you will agree with me, that it is not so easy to find the offended party.”</p>
			<p>Kudriasheff rang, and the stolid figure of a manservant appeared.</p>
			<p>“Ivan Pavlich, bring me the drawing out of the study. It is hanging between the windows. You will see, Vassili Petrovich, what a gigantic business it is. I really have even begun to find poetry in it.”</p>
			<p>Ivan Pavlich carefully brought an enormous sheet gummed on calico. Kudriasheff took it, pushed away the plates, bottles, and glasses near him, and spread out his drawing on the tablecloth, stained in places with red wine.</p>
			<p>“Look here,” he said. “This is a sectional drawing of our mole, and this is a longitudinal section. Do you see the part painted blue? That is the sea. The depth here is so great that it is impossible to build up from the bottom, so we are first of all preparing a bed for the mole.”</p>
			<p>“A bed?” asked Vassili Petrovich. “What a strange name!”</p>
			<p>“A stone bed of enormous blocks of stone, each of which is not less than one cubic foot in size.” Kudriasheff detached from his watch-chain a pair of miniature silver compasses, and took a little line by them on the drawing. “See, Vassili Petrovich, this is a <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">sajene</i>. If we measure the bed transversely, it will show a width of not less than fifty <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">sajenes</span>. Not what you would call a narrow bed, eh? A mass of stone of this width is being raised from the bottom of the sea to within sixteen feet of the surface. If you picture to yourself the width of this bed and its enormous length, you will get some idea of the size of this mass of stone. Sometimes, do you know, for a whole day barge after barge will come to the mole and throw out its load, but when you measure, the increase is infinitesimal. The stones just seem to fall into a bottomless pit.⁠ ⁠… The bed is painted here on the plan a dirty grey colour. They are making progress with it, but from the shore other work is already commencing on it. Steam cranes are lowering on to this bed huge artificial stones, cubic-shaped blocks made of cobbles and cement, each of which is a cubic <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">sajene</span> in size, and weighs many hundreds of poods. The crane raises them, turns, and places them in rows. It is a strange sensation when you realize that with a slight pressure of the hand you can make this mass rise and lower at will. When such a mass obeys you, you are conscious of the might of man.⁠ ⁠… Do you see⁠—here they are, these cubes.” He pointed them out with the compasses. “They will be laid almost up to the surface of the water, and then the upper stone layer of hewn stone will be placed on them. So you see what sort of work it is. Second to no Egyptian Pyramid. These are the general features of the work, which has already lasted some years. How much longer, goodness only knows. The longer the better⁠ ⁠… at the same time, if it proceeds at its present rate it will last out our century.”</p>
			<p>“Well, and what else?” asked Vassili Petrovich after a long silence.</p>
			<p>“What else? Well, we sit in our places and get as much as is necessary.”</p>
			<p>“But I still do not see from your story how you get what money you want.”</p>
			<p>“You innocent! Listen! By the way, we are, I think, of the same age. Only the experience which you lack has made me wiser⁠—has made me older. This is how it is: You know that on every sea there are storms? They do their work. Every year they wash away the beds, and we lay down a new one.”</p>
			<p>“But, still, I don’t understand how⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“We lay it down,” calmly continued Kudriasheff, “on paper, here on the drawing, because it is only on the drawing that the storms wash it away.”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich was completely bewildered.</p>
			<p>“Because, waves cannot, in fact, wash away a bed only eight feet high. Our sea is not an ocean, and even in an ocean such moles as ours would stand. But with us in the two thousand <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">sajenes</span> depth, where the bed ends, it is almost a dead calm. Listen, Vassili Petrovich, how the thing is managed. In the spring, after the bad weather of the autumn and winter, we meet, and put the question, How much of the bed has been washed away this year? We take the drawings and note. Well, then, we write, ‘Washed away⁠—let us say, by storms⁠—so many cubic <span xml:lang="ru-Latn">sajenes</span> of work.’ And they reply, ‘Build and d⁠⸺⁠n you!’ Well, we ‘repair.’ ”</p>
			<p>“But what do you repair?”</p>
			<p>“Our pockets, of course,” said Kudriasheff, laughing at his joke.</p>
			<p>“No, no, this cannot be; it is impossible!” cried Vassili Petrovich, jumping up from his chair and running up and down the room. “Listen, Kudriasheff, you are ruining yourself⁠ ⁠… not to mention the immorality of it.⁠ ⁠… I simply want to say that they will catch you all in this, and you will be done for⁠—will go to Siberia. Alas! what hopes! expectations! A capable, honourable young man⁠—and suddenly⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich launched out into heroics, and spoke long and fervently. But Kudriasheff quite calmly smoked a cigar and watched his excited friend.</p>
			<p>“Yes, you are sure to go to Siberia,” said Vassili Petrovich, as he concluded his harangue.</p>
			<p>“It is a long way to Siberia, my friend. You are an extraordinary man; you don’t understand in the least. Am I really the only one who⁠ ⁠… to put it more politely⁠ ⁠… ‘acquires’? All around, even the air seems to pilfer. Not long ago a fresh hand appeared and began to write about honesty. What happened? We protected ourselves.⁠ ⁠… And always will protect ourselves. All for one, one for all. Do you imagine that man is his own enemy? Who will take upon himself to touch me when through me he himself may come to grief?”</p>
			<p>“It means that everyone is guilty, as Kryloff said.”</p>
			<p>“Guilty, guilty! All take what they can from life and do not regard it platonically.⁠ ⁠… But about what did we begin to talk? Ah yes, of about whom I am insulting? Tell me whom? The lower class? Well, how? I don’t take straight from the source, but I take what is ready and what has already been taken, and if I don’t take it somebody worse than I will take it. At any rate, I don’t live like a brute beast. I take some interest in intellectual matters. I subscribe to a whole bundle of papers and magazines. They cry out about science and civilization, but to what could it be applied if it were not for persons like us, people with means? And who would furnish science with the power to advance if not people with means? And means must be found somewhere, even in a so-called honest⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t finish, don’t say that last word, Nicolai Constantinovich.”</p>
			<p>“Word? What? Would it be better for your warped mind if I commenced to lie to justify myself? We rob, do you hear? Yes, if the truth were spoken, you are now robbing.”</p>
			<p>“Listen, Kudriasheff⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“It is no use my listening,” replied Kudriasheff with a laugh. “You, too, my friend are a robber, under a mask of virtue. What is your occupation⁠—teaching? Will you really repay with your labour even the pittance which will be paid you? Will you turn out even one respectable man? Three-fourths of your pupils will become such as I am, and one-fourth like yourself⁠—that is, a well-intentioned ‘fainéant.’ Are you not taking money for nothing? Answer me frankly. And are you so far apart from me? Yet you put on airs and preach honour!”</p>
			<p>“Kudriasheff, believe me, that this conversation is extremely painful to me.”</p>
			<p>“And to me⁠—not in the least.”</p>
			<p>“I did not expect to find what I have found in you.”</p>
			<p>“That’s stupid. People change, and I have changed, but in what direction⁠—you could not guess. You are not a prophet.”</p>
			<p>“It is not necessary to be a prophet to hope that an honourable youth will become an honourable citizen of the State.”</p>
			<p>“Bah! drop it! Don’t use such words with me. ‘An honourable citizen!’ Out of what schoolbooks have you dug up this archaism? It is time to finish with sentimentalism; you are not a boy.⁠ ⁠… Do you know what Vasia⁠—” And here Kudriasheff took Vassili Petrovich by the arm. “Let us be friends and drop this infernal subject. Better to drink to our comradeship. Ivan Pavlich, bring another bottle of this.”</p>
			<p>Ivan Pavlich slowly appeared with a fresh bottle. Kudriasheff filled the glasses.</p>
			<p>“Well, we will drink to prosperity⁠ ⁠… of what? Well, it’s all the same for your and my prosperity.”</p>
			<p>“I drink,” said Vassili Petrovich with feeling, “that you may come to your senses. That is my strongest wish.”</p>
			<p>“Be a good chap and don’t talk about that.⁠ ⁠… If I come to my senses, it will be impossible to drink; then things will be in a bad way. Do you see what your logic amounts to? Let us drink just simply without any toasts. Let us drop this boring argument. It is all the same, we shall not come to any agreement. You will not put me on the true path, and I shall not convince you. It is not worth it. You will come round to my views.”</p>
			<p>“Never!” exclaimed Vassili Petrovich with warmth, banging his glass on the table.</p>
			<p>“Well, we’ll see. But why have I told you all about myself, and you have said nothing about yourself? What have you been doing, and what are your plans?”</p>
			<p>“I have already told you I have been appointed teacher.”</p>
			<p>“Is this your first place?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, before this I used to give private lessons.”</p>
			<p>“And do you intend to give them here?”</p>
			<p>“If I can find any. Why?”</p>
			<p>“We will find some, my dear chap; we will find some,” and Kudriasheff slapped Vassili Petrovich on the shoulder. “We will hand over all the local youth to you. How much did you charge an hour in Petersburg?”</p>
			<p>“Very little. It was very difficult to get good lessons. About two roubles, not more.”</p>
			<p>“And for such pittance a human being wears himself out! Well, here, don’t you dare to ask less than five roubles. It is hard work. I remember how I used to run after extra work during my first and second years. At the University there were times when I was glad to get fifty kopecks an hour. A most thankless and difficult work. I will introduce you to all our friends. There are some very nice families here, and young ladies. If you behave cleverly, I will get you engaged if you like. Eh, Vassili Petrovich?”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you.”</p>
			<p>“What, engaged already? Really?”</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich’s face betrayed his confusion.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I see it by your eyes. Well, old chap, I congratulate you. How soon? But Vasia! Ivan Pavlich!” shouted Kudriasheff.</p>
			<p>Ivan Pavlich appeared at the door with a surly expression on his sleepy face.</p>
			<p>“Bring some champagne!”</p>
			<p>“There is none⁠—all drunk,” replied the man morosely.</p>
			<p>“Don’t bother, Kudriasheff. Why all this?”</p>
			<p>“Silence, I am not asking you. Do you want to insult me, or what? Ivan Pavlich, don’t come back without the champagne, do you hear? Be off!”</p>
			<p>“But everything is closed, Nicolai Constantinovich.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t argue with me. You have the money. Be off and get some.”</p>
			<p>The butler went off muttering something to himself.</p>
			<p>“The sulky beast is still grumbling. And you, too, with your ‘Don’t bother.’ If we are not to drink on such an occasion as this, what does champagne exist for?⁠ ⁠… Well, who is she?”</p>
			<p>“Who?”</p>
			<p>“Who, why she, your fiancée.⁠ ⁠… Pauper, heiress, nice?”</p>
			<p>“It’s all the same to you⁠—you don’t know her, so why tell you her name? She has no money, and beauty⁠—that is a matter of taste. In my opinion she is beautiful.”</p>
			<p>“Have you a photograph?” asked Kudriasheff. “Bring it out. Do you carry it next to your heart? Show it me?”</p>
			<p>And he stretched out his hand.</p>
			<p>Vassili Petrovich’s face, flushed from the wine, became still redder. Not knowing why, he unbuttoned his coat, took out his pocketbook and the precious photograph. Kudriasheff seized it and began to examine it.</p>
			<p>“Not so bad, my dear chap. You know a good thing when you see it.”</p>
			<p>“Cannot you talk without using those expressions?” said Vassili Petrovich curtly. “Give it me back. I will put it away.”</p>
			<p>“Wait a bit. Let me enjoy it. I wish you all luck and prosperity. Well, take it and put it back against your heart. Oh, you wonder, marvel!” exclaimed Kudriasheff, laughing.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand what you have found laughable in this?”</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear chap, it is funny. I can picture to myself what you will be like in ten years’ time: you in a dressing-gown, a wife, seven children, and no money with which to buy them shoes, breeches, hats, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Prosaic. Will you, then, carry this photograph about in your breast-pocket? Ha, ha, ha!”</p>
			<p>“It would be more to the point if you will inform me what poetry awaits you in the future? Get money and spend it? Eat, drink, and sleep?”</p>
			<p>“Not to eat, drink, and sleep, but to live. Live with a consciousness of one’s freedom, and even a certain power.”</p>
			<p>“Power? What power have you got?”</p>
			<p>“There is power in money, and I have money. I do what I like.⁠ ⁠… If I wish to buy you⁠—I shall buy you.”</p>
			<p>“Kudriasheff!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Don’t get on the high horse about nothing. Surely old friends may joke with each other? Of course, I shall not try to buy you. Live your own way as you like. All the same, I do what I wish. Oh, what a fool, an idiot, I am!” suddenly exclaimed Kudriasheff, hitting his forehead. “Here we are, and have been sitting for I don’t know how long, and I haven’t shown you <em>the</em> sight. You talk about eating, drinking, and sleeping. I will show you something in a minute which will make you take back your words. Come along. Bring a candle.”</p>
			<p>“Where?” asked Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>“Follow me. You will see where.” Vassili Petrovich, as he rose from the table, felt that all was not as it should be. His legs were not altogether obedient, and he could not hold the candlestick without dropping candle-grease on the carpet. However, obtaining some sort of control over his recalcitrant limbs, he followed behind Kudriasheff. They passed through several rooms along a narrow passage, and appeared in a damp and dark compartment. Their footsteps resounded dully on the stone floor. The noise of falling water somewhere sounded in never-ceasing accord. Stalactites of dark blue glass hung from the ceiling. Artificial rocks rose here and there half covered by masses of tropical foliage and panes of glass glistened darkly in certain places.</p>
			<p>“What is this?” asked Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>“An aquarium to which I have devoted two years of time and much money. Wait a moment, and I will light it up.”</p>
			<p>Kudriasheff disappeared behind some foliage, and Vassili Petrovich went up to one of the panes of glass and commenced to examine what was behind it. The feeble light of the candle could not penetrate far into the water, but the fish, large and small, attracted by the bright light, collected in the part which was lighted up, and gazed stupidly at Vassili Petrovich with their round eyes, opening and shutting their mouths, and moving their gills and fins.</p>
			<p>Farther off there loomed up the dark outlines of seaweed, amongst which some kind of reptile was moving, although Vassili Petrovich could not discern its precise form.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a flood of blinding light compelled him momentarily to close his eyes, and when he again opened them, he did not recognize the aquarium. Kudriasheff had turned on electric light in two places. The light from the lamps penetrated the mass of blue water, swarming with fish and other live creatures, and filled with growth which showed up boldly against the undefined background in silhouettes of blood-red, brown, and dark green. The rocks and tropical growth, made still darker by contrast, prettily framed the thick glass through which a view of the inside of the aquarium was opened up. In the aquarium all was a seething, hurrying mass, alarmed by the dazzling light. A whole shoal of small but big-headed chub rushed hither and thither, turning as if by word of command, sterlets wriggled about with their noses stuck to the glass, now rising to the surface, now sinking to the bottom of the water just as if they wished to break through the transparent but hard obstacle. A smooth black eel buried himself in the sand at the bottom of the aquarium, raising a whole cloud of mud. A ridiculous stumpy cuttlefish detached himself from the rock on which he was resting, and swam jerkily backwards across the aquarium, dragging his long feelers behind him. Altogether it was so pretty and so new to Vassili Petrovich, that he was entranced.</p>
			<p>“Well, Vassili Petrovich, what do you think of it?” asked Kudriasheff, coming out to him.</p>
			<p>“Marvellous! Extraordinary! How did you arrange all this? What taste and effect!”</p>
			<p>“Add also knowledge. I went to Berlin expressly to examine the aquarium there, and, without boasting, I will say that mine, although, of course, it is not so big, is not in any way inferior in point of beauty and interest.⁠ ⁠… This aquarium is my pride and consolation. However bored, it is only necessary to come here, and I can sit and gaze by the hour. I like all these fish, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, because they are frank, and not like our friend man. They go for each other without the least shame. Look, look! Do you see? A chase!”</p>
			<p>A small fish was impetuously rushing now to the surface, then to the bottom, and in every direction trying to escape from some long marauder. In its mortal terror it kept jumping out of the water into the air, or trying to conceal itself in the recesses of the rocks, but keen teeth were chasing it from all sides. The pirate was just on the point of seizing his quarry, when suddenly another robber darted in from the side, made a grab, and the little fish disappeared in its jaws. The pursuer stopped perplexed, and the robber hid itself in a dark corner.</p>
			<p>“Snatched away,” said Kudriasheff. “Idiot! got nothing. Was it worth chasing simply for the booty to be taken from under your very nose?⁠ ⁠… If only you knew how they feed on these little fish: today a whole shoal is put in, and by tomorrow it has disappeared, gone⁠—eaten up. They eat each other and never dream about immorality; but we? I have only just got rid of this fiddle-faddle, Vassili Petrovich. Don’t you really in the end agree that it is all fiddle-faddle?”</p>
			<p>“What is?” inquired Vassili Petrovich, not taking his eyes off the water.</p>
			<p>“Why, these gnawings. What are they for? Your conscience may prick you, but still⁠ ⁠… Well, I have got rid of them now, and I try to imitate these creatures.”</p>
			<p>He pointed with his finger to the aquarium.</p>
			<p>“Do as you like,” said Vassili Petrovich with a sigh. “Listen, Kudriasheff. Surely all this growth, all these fish⁠—it is all saltwater life.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and the water is seawater. I have laid down a pipe on purpose.”</p>
			<p>“What, from the sea? But all this must cost an enormous lot?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. My aquarium costs about thirty thousand roubles.”</p>
			<p>“Thirty thousand!” exclaimed Vassili Petrovich in a horrified tone. “With a salary of one thousand six hundred roubles a year?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, drop this honour! If you have looked at it we will go back. Ivan Pavlich by now should have brought the required⁠ ⁠… Only wait a moment whilst I switch off the light.”</p>
			<p>The aquarium again became plunged in gloom. The still burning candle appeared a dull, smoky little light to Vassili Petrovich.</p>
			<p>When they reached the dining-room, Ivan Pavlich was waiting, and holding a bottle wrapped in a serviette in readiness.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
