<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Signal</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-signal" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Signal</h2>
			<p>Simon Ivanoff was a linesman on the railway. From his hut it was twenty versts to the nearest station on one side, and ten versts on the other. Last year, about four versts away, a spinning-mill had opened, and its tall chimney stood out darkly against the forest, but except for the huts of other linesmen there was no living soul nearer him.</p>
			<p>Simon Ivanoff’s health had broken down generally. Nine years ago he had been at the war and had acted as servant to an officer, with whom he served right through the campaign. He had starved, been roasted by the sun, had frozen, and had made marches of forty and fifty versts in the heat and frost. He had been under fire, but, thank God! no bullet had touched him. Once his regiment had been in the first line. For a whole week there had been skirmishes with the Turks; the Russian and Turkish firing-lines had been separated only by a deep strath, and from morn till eve they kept up a continuous crossfire. Simon’s officer had also been in the firing-line, and three times a day Simon took him a steaming samovar and his dinner from the regimental kitchen in the ravine. As he went with the samovar along the open, bullets hummed about him, and snapped viciously against the stones in a manner terrifying to Simon, who used to cry, but still kept on. The officers were very pleased with him, because there was always hot tea for them. He returned from the campaign whole, but with rheumatism in his hands and feet. He had experienced no little sorrow since then. He arrived home to find his father, an old man, had died; his little four-year-old son also dead (his throat), so there only remained Simon and his wife. They could not do much. It was difficult to plough with swollen hands and feet. They could no longer stay in their own village, and they started off to seek fortune in new places. Simon and his wife stayed for a short time on the line, in Cherson and in Donschina, but nowhere found luck. Then the wife went out to service, and Simon, as formerly, travelled about. Once he happened to travel on an engine, and at one of the stations he saw the stationmaster, whose face seemed familiar to him. Simon looked at the stationmaster and the stationmaster at Simon, and they recognized each other. He had been an officer of Simon’s regiment.</p>
			<p>“You are Ivanoff?” he said.</p>
			<p>“Exactly, Your Excellency; that’s me.”</p>
			<p>“How have you got here?”</p>
			<p>Simon told him all.</p>
			<p>“Where are you off to?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“You idiot! How ‘can’t’ you tell me?”</p>
			<p>“Quite true, Your Excellency, because there is nowhere to go. I must look for work, sir.”</p>
			<p>The stationmaster looked at him, thought a bit, and said: “Look here, friend, stay here a bit at the station. You are married, I think. Where is your wife?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Your Excellency, I am married. My wife is at Kursk, in service with a merchant.”</p>
			<p>“Well, write to your wife to come here. I will give you a free pass for her. We have a linesman’s hut empty. I will speak to the District Chief on your behalf.”</p>
			<p>“I shall be very grateful, Your Excellency,” replied Simon.</p>
			<p>He stayed at the station, helped in the kitchen of the stationmaster, cut firewood, kept the yard clean, and swept the platform. In a fortnight’s time his wife arrived, and Simon went on a hand-trolley to his hut. The hut was a new one and warm, with as much wood as he wanted. There was a little vegetable garden, the legacy of former linesmen, and there was about half a dessiatine of ploughed land on either side of the railway embankment. Simon was rejoiced. He began to think of doing some farming, of purchasing a cow and horse.</p>
			<p>He was given all necessary stores⁠—a green flag, a red flag, lanterns, a horn, hammer, screw-wrench for the nuts, a crowbar, spade, broom, bolts, and nails; they gave him two books of regulations, and a timetable of the trains. At first Simon could not sleep at night, and learnt the whole timetable by heart. Two hours before a train was due he would go round his section, sit on the bench at his hut, and look and listen whether the rails were trembling or the rumble of the train could be heard. He even learned the regulations by heart, although he could only read by spelling out each word.</p>
			<p>It was summer; the work was not heavy; there was no snow to clear away, and the trains on that line are infrequent. Simon used to go over his verst twice a day, examine and screw up nuts here and there, keep the bed level, look at the water-pipes, and then go home to his own affairs. There was only one drawback⁠—<abbr>i.e.</abbr>, whatever he wished to do he had first to obtain permission of the Traffic Inspector. Simon and his wife even began to get bored.</p>
			<p>Two months passed, and Simon began to make the acquaintance of his neighbours, the other linesmen on either side of him. One was a very old man, whom the authorities were always meaning to relieve. He scarcely moved out of his hut. His wife used to do all his work. The other linesman nearer the station was a young man, thin, but muscular. He and Simon met for the first time on the line midway between the huts. Simon took off his hat and bowed. “Good health to you, neighbour,” he said.</p>
			<p>The neighbour glanced askance at him. “How do you do?” he replied; then turned around and made off.</p>
			<p>Later the wives met. Simon’s wife passed the time of day with her neighbour, but she also did not say much and went off.</p>
			<p>On one occasion Simon said to her: “Young woman, your husband is not very talkative.”</p>
			<p>The woman said nothing at first, then replied: “But what is there for him to talk with you about? Everyone has his own business. Go your way, and God be with you.”</p>
			<p>However, after another month or so they became acquainted. Simon would go with Vassili along the line, sit on the edge of a pipe, smoke, and talk of life. Vassili, for the most part, kept silent, but Simon talked of his village, and of the campaign through which he had passed.</p>
			<p>“I have had no little sorrow in my day,” he would say; “and goodness knows I have not lived long. God has not given me happiness, but what He may give, so will it be. That’s so, friend Vassili Stepanich.”</p>
			<p>Vassili Stepanich knocked out the ashes of his pipe against a rail, stood up, and said: “It is not luck which follows us in life, but human beings. There is no wild beast on this earth more ferocious, cruel, and evil than man. Wolf does not eat wolf, but a man will readily devour man.”</p>
			<p>“Come, friend, don’t say that; a wolf eats wolf.”</p>
			<p>“The words came into my mind and I said it. All the same, there is nothing more cruel than man. If it were not for his wickedness and greed it would be possible to live. Everybody tries to sting you to the quick, to bite and devour you.”</p>
			<p>Simon pondered a bit. “I don’t know, brother,” he said; “perhaps it is as you say, and perhaps it is God’s will.”</p>
			<p>“And perhaps, then,” said Vassili, “it is waste of time for me to talk with you. To put everything unpleasant on God, and sit and suffer, means, brother, being not a man but an animal. That’s what I have to say.” And he turned and went off without saying goodbye.</p>
			<p>Simon also got up. “Neighbour,” he called, “why do you lose your temper?” But his neighbour did not look round, and went on.</p>
			<p>Simon gazed after him until Vassili was lost to sight in the cutting at the turn. He went home and said to his wife: “Well, Arina, our neighbour is a wicked person, not a man.”</p>
			<p>However, they did not quarrel. They met again, and, as formerly, discussed the same old topics.</p>
			<p>“Ah, friend, if it were not for men we should not be sitting, you and I, in these huts,” said Vassili, on one occasion.</p>
			<p>“And what about the huts? … not so bad; it is possible to live in them.”</p>
			<p>“Possible to live in them, indeed! … Eh! You! … You have lived long and learned little, looked at much and seen little. What sort of life is there for a poor man in a hut here or there. These cannibals are devouring you. They are extracting all your lifeblood, and when you become old, they will throw you out just as they do with husks they feed pigs on. What pay do you get?”</p>
			<p>“Not much, Vassili Stepanich⁠—twelve roubles.”</p>
			<p>“And I, thirteen and a half roubles. Allow me to ask you why? By the regulations the Company should give us fifteen roubles a month with firing and lighting. Who decides that you should have twelve roubles, or I thirteen and a half? Ask yourself! … And you say it is possible to live! You understand it is not a question of one and a half roubles or three roubles⁠—even if they paid us each the whole fifteen roubles. I was at the station last month. The Director passed through, so I saw him … I had that honour. … He had a separate carriage, came out and stood on the platform, stood. … Yes, I shall not stay here long; I shall go, anywhere, follow my nose.”</p>
			<p>“But where will you go, Stepanich? One does not seek good from good. Here you have a house, warmth, a little piece of land. Your wife is a worker …”</p>
			<p>“Land! You should look at my piece of land. Not a twig on it⁠—nothing. I had planted some cabbages in the spring, just when the Traffic Inspector came along. He said: ‘What is this? Why have you not reported this? Why have you done this without permission? Dig them up, roots and all.’ He was drunk. Another time he would not have said a word, but this time it got into his head … three roubles fine! …”</p>
			<p>Vassili kept silent for a while, pulling at his pipe, then added quietly: “A little more and I should have done for him.”</p>
			<p>“But, neighbour, you are hot-tempered.”</p>
			<p>“No, I am not hot-tempered, but I tell the truth and think. Yes, he will still get a bloody nose from me. I will complain to the District Chief. We will see then!” And he did complain.</p>
			<p>Once the District Chief came along to inspect the line. Three days later important personages were coming from <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, were to pass over the line. They were conducting an inquiry, so that previous to their journey it was necessary to put everything in order. Ballast was laid down, the bed was levelled, the sleepers carefully examined, spikes driven in a bit, nuts screwed up, posts painted, and orders were given for yellow sand to be sprinkled at the level crossings. The woman at the neighbouring hut turned her old man out to weed. Simon worked for a whole week. He put everything in order, mended his kaftan, cleaned and polished his brass plate with a piece of brick until it fairly shone. Vassili also worked hard. The District Chief arrived on a trolley, four men worked the handles, the levers making the six wheels hum. The trolley travelled at twenty versts an hour, but the wheels squeaked. It reached Simon’s hut, and he ran out and reported in soldierly fashion. All appeared to be in repair.</p>
			<p>“Have you been long here?” inquired the Chief.</p>
			<p>“Since the second of May, Your Excellency.”</p>
			<p>“All right. Thank you. And who is at hut <abbr>No.</abbr> 164?”</p>
			<p>The Traffic Inspector (he was travelling with the Chief on the trolley) replied: “Vassili Spiridoff.”</p>
			<p>“Spiridoff. Spiridoff. … Ah! is he the man against whom you made a note last year?”</p>
			<p>“The same.”</p>
			<p>“Well, we will see Vassili Spiridoff. Go on!” The workmen laid to the handles, and the trolley got under way. Simon watched it, and thought, “Well, there will be trouble between them and my neighbour.”</p>
			<p>About two hours later he started on his round. He saw someone coming along the line from the cutting. Something white showed on his head. Simon began to look more attentively. It was Vassili; he had a stick in his hand, a small bundle on his shoulder, and his cheek was bound up in a handkerchief.</p>
			<p>“Where are you off to, neighbour?” cried Simon.</p>
			<p>Vassili came quite close. He was very pale, white as chalk, and his eyes had a wild look. Almost choking, he muttered: “To the town⁠—to Moscow⁠—to the Head Office.”</p>
			<p>“Head Office? Ah, you are going, I suppose, to complain. Give it up! Vassili Stepanich, forget it. …”</p>
			<p>“No, mate, I will not forget. It is too late. See! He struck me in the face, drew blood. So long as I live I will not forget. … I will not leave it like this! …”</p>
			<p>Simon took him by the hand. “Give it up, Stepanich. I am advising you truly. You will not better things. …”</p>
			<p>“Better things! I know myself that I shall not do better. You spoke truly about Fate. Better for myself not to do it, but one must stand up for the right, mate.”</p>
			<p>“But tell me, how did it all happen?”</p>
			<p>“How? … He examined everything, got down from the trolley, looked into the hut. I knew beforehand that he would be strict, and so put everything into proper order as it should be. He was just going when I made my complaint. He immediately cried out: ‘Here,’ he said, ‘is a Government inquiry coming, and you make a complaint about a vegetable garden. Here,’ he said, ‘are Privy Councillors coming, and you come worrying about cabbages! …’ I lost patience and said something⁠—not very much, but it offended him, and he struck me in the face … and I stood still; I did nothing, just as if it was in the proper order of things. They went off; I came to myself, washed my face, and left.”</p>
			<p>“And what about the hut?”</p>
			<p>“The wife has stayed. She will look after things all right. Never mind about their roads.”</p>
			<p>Vassili got up and collected himself. “Goodbye, Ivanoff. … I do not know whether I shall get anyone at the Office to hear me.”</p>
			<p>“Surely you are not going to walk?”</p>
			<p>“At the station I will try to get on a goods-train, and tomorrow I shall be in Moscow.”</p>
			<p>The neighbours bade each other farewell. Vassili was absent for some time. His wife worked for him night and day. She never slept, and wore herself out waiting for her husband. On the third day the commission arrived. An engine, luggage-van, and two first-class saloons; but Vassili was still away. Simon saw the wife on the fourth day. Her face was swollen from crying and her eyes were red.</p>
			<p>“Has your husband returned?” he asked. But the woman only made a gesture with her hands, and without saying a word went her way.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Simon had learnt when still a lad to make flutes out of a kind of reed. He used to burn out the heart of the stalk, make holes where necessary, drill them, make a mouthpiece at one end, and tune them so well that it was possible to play almost anything you wanted on them. He made a number of them in his spare time, and sent them by his friends amongst the guards on the goods-trains to the bazaar in the town. He got two kopecks apiece for them. On the day following the visit of the commission he left his wife at home to meet the six o’clock train, and, taking a knife, started off to the forest to cut some sticks. He went to the end of his section⁠—at this point the line makes a sharp turn⁠—went down the embankment, and went into the wood under the mountain. About half a verst away there was a big marsh, around which there grew splendid bushes out of which to make his flutes. He cut a whole bundle of sticks and started back home. As he went through the wood the sun was already getting low, and in the dead stillness only the twittering of the birds was audible, and the crackle of the dead wood under his feet. As Simon walked along rapidly and easily he fancied he heard the clang of iron striking iron, and he redoubled his pace. There was no repair going on in his section at this time. What did it mean? he wondered. Coming out on to the fringe of the wood, the railway embankment stood high before him; on the top of it a man was squatting on the bed of the line busily engaged in something. Simon commenced to crawl up quietly towards him. He thought that it was someone after the nuts which secure the rails. He watched, and a man got up, holding a crowbar in his hand. He had loosened a rail with it, so that it would move to one side. A mist came before Simon’s eyes; he wanted to cry out, but could not. It was Vassili! … Simon scrambled up the bank as Vassili with crowbar and wrench slid headlong down the other side.</p>
			<p>“Vassili Stepanich! For the love. … Old friend! Come back! Give me the crowbar. We will put the rail back; no one will know. Come back! Save your soul from this sin!”</p>
			<p>Vassili did not look back, but disappeared into the wood.</p>
			<p>Simon stood before the rail which had been torn up. He threw down his bundle of sticks. A train was due; not a goods-train, but a passenger-train. And he had nothing with which to stop it, no flag. He could not replace the rail and could not drive in the spikes with his bare hands. It was necessary to run, absolutely necessary to run to the hut for some tools. “God help me!” he murmured.</p>
			<p>Simon started running towards his hut. He was out of breath, but still ran, falling every now and then. He had cleared the forest; there only remained another hundred <i xml:lang="ru">sajenes</i> to the hut, not more, when he heard the distant hooter of the factory sound⁠—six o’clock! In two minutes’ time <abbr>No.</abbr> 7 train was due. “Oh, Lord! Have pity on innocent souls!” In his mind Simon saw the engine strike against the loosened rail with its left wheel, shiver, careen, tear up and splinter the sleepers⁠—and just there, there was a curve and the embankment eleven <span xml:lang="ru">sajenes</span> high, down which the engine would topple⁠—and the third-class carriages would be packed … little children. … They are all sitting in the train now not dreaming of any danger. “Oh, Lord! Tell me what to do! … No, it is not possible to run to the hut and get back in time.”</p>
			<p>Simon did not run on to the hut, but turned back and ran faster than before. He was running almost mechanically, blindly; he did not know himself what was to happen. He ran as far as the rail which had been pulled up; his sticks were lying in a heap. He bent down, seized one without knowing why, and ran on farther. It seemed to him that the train was already coming. He heard the distant whistle; he heard the quiet, even tremor of the rails; but his strength was exhausted, he could run no farther, and came to a halt about one hundred <span xml:lang="ru">sajenes</span> from the awful spot. Then an idea came into his head, literally like a ray of light. Pulling off his cap, he took out of it a cotton scarf, drew his knife out of the upper part of his boot, and crossed himself, muttering, “God bless me!”</p>
			<p>He buried the knife into his left arm above the elbow; the blood spurted out, flowing in a hot stream. In this he soaked his scarf, smoothed it out, tied it to the stick and hung out his red flag.</p>
			<p>He stood waving his flag. The train was already in sight. The driver will not see him⁠—will come close up, and a heavy train cannot be pulled up in a hundred <span xml:lang="ru">sajenes</span>.</p>
			<p>And the blood kept on flowing. Simon kept pressing the sides of the wound together wanting to close it, but the blood did not diminish. Evidently he had cut his arm very deeply. His head commenced to swim, black spots began to dance before his eyes, and then it became dark. There was a ringing in his ears. He could not see the train or hear the noise. Only one thought possessed him. “I shall not be able to keep standing up. I shall fall and drop the flag; the train will pass over me. … Help me, oh Lord! …”</p>
			<p>All became quite black before him, his mind became a blank, and he dropped the flag; but the bloodstained banner did not fall to the ground. A hand seized it and held it high to meet the approaching train. The engine-driver saw it, shut the regulator, and reversed steam. The train came to a standstill.</p>
			<p>People jumped out of the carriages and collected in a crowd. Looking, they saw a man lying senseless on the footway, drenched in blood, and another man standing beside him with a bloodstained rag on a stick.</p>
			<p>Vassili looked around at all; then, lowering his head, said: “Bind me; I have pulled up a rail!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
