<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Frog Who Travelled</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-frog-who-travelled" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Frog Who Travelled</h2>
			<p>Once upon a time there lived in this world a frog. She used to sit in a swamp and catch mosquitoes and midges, and in the spring used to croak loudly in company with her friends. And but for an event which occurred she would have lived happily her whole life through⁠—provided, of course, a stork had not eaten her.</p>
			<p>One day she was sitting on a crooked branch which stuck out of the water, and was revelling in a warm, slight drizzling rain.</p>
			<p>“Ah me, what beautiful damp weather to-day!” she thought. “What a delight it is to live!”</p>
			<p>The drizzle damped her striped polished back, and the raindrops trickled down under her belly behind her paws, which was extraordinarily pleasant⁠—so pleasant that she almost gave a croak. But luckily she remembered that it was already autumn, and that frogs don’t croak in the autumn⁠—the spring is the time for that⁠—and had she croaked she might have lost her “frogly” dignity. So she kept quiet and continued to take her ease.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a thin, intermittent, whistling noise resounded in the air.</p>
			<p>There is a species of duck which, when it flies, makes a singing, or rather a whistling, sound with its wings as they cleave the air. “Phew, phew, phew, phew!” sounds through the air when a covey of such ducks fly high above us, although the birds themselves are invisible, so high do they fly. On this occasion the ducks, having described an enormous semicircle, swooped down and settled in the very same swamp in which the frog lived.</p>
			<p>“Quack, quack!” said one of them. “We have still a long way to fly; we must have something to eat.”</p>
			<p>And the frog instantly hid herself, and, although she knew that the ducks would not eat her⁠—a big and fat frog⁠—she all the same dived under the log in case of accidents. However, having thought it over, she decided to stick her head with its protruding eyes out of the water. She was very curious to know to where the ducks were flying.</p>
			<p>“Quack, quack!” said another duck. “It is already quite cold. Let us get away as quickly as possible to the South.”</p>
			<p>And all the ducks began to quack loudly in token of their approval.</p>
			<p>“Mesdames ducks,” said the frog, plucking up her courage, “what is the ‘South’ to which you are flying? Please excuse me for disturbing you.”</p>
			<p>The ducks crowded round the frog. At first they evinced a decided inclination to eat her, but each on reflection came to the conclusion that she was too big to be swallowed. And then they all began to quack and flap their wings.</p>
			<p>“It is very nice in the South! It is warm there now! And what lovely warm swamps there are there! What worms! It is nice in the South!”</p>
			<p>They quacked to such a degree that they nearly deafened the frog. She could scarcely prevail on them to be quiet, and begged one of them, who seemed to her the fattest and most intelligent of them all, to explain to her what was the “South.” And when the duck told her all about the South, the frog went into ecstasies, but; nevertheless, at the end of the description, because she was a cautious frog, she asked him:</p>
			<p>“And are there midges and mosquitoes there?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I should just say so⁠—clouds of them!” replied the duck.</p>
			<p>“Croak!” said the frog, and immediately turned round to see if there was any friend near who could have heard her and scolded her for croaking in the autumn. She really could not restrain herself from giving at least one little croak. “Take me with you!”</p>
			<p>“You astonish me!” exclaimed the duck. “How can we take you? You have no wings!”</p>
			<p>“When do you fly?” asked the frog.</p>
			<p>“Soon, soon!” cried out all the ducks. “Quack, quack, quack! Here it is cold! To the South! to the South!”</p>
			<p>“Allow me to think only five minutes,” said the frog. “I will come back directly. I am sure to think of something good.”</p>
			<p>And she flopped from the branch, on to which she had again clambered, into the water, dived into the mud, and absolutely buried herself in it, so that no extraneous matter should distract her thoughts. Five minutes passed, and the ducks had all collected to fly, when suddenly from out of the water near the branch on which the frog had sat her mouth appeared, and it wore an expression of delight such as only a frog’s mouth can assume.</p>
			<p>“I have thought it out; I have found a way!” she said. “Let two of you, one at each end, take a twig in your beaks, and I will hang on to it in the middle. You will fly and I will travel. Only, whatever happens, you must not quack nor I croak⁠—and then all will be superb.”</p>
			<p>Now, although, goodness knows, it is by no means a joke to carry a frog three thousand versts, keeping silent all the time, still the ingenuity of her plan sent the ducks into such a delirium of delight that they unanimously resolved to take the frog with them. They agreed to relieve each other every two hours, and as there were as many and many ducks as could be, and only one frog, no duck’s turn to carry the frog would come very often. They found a good strong twig, two ducks took it in their beaks, the frog caught hold in the middle with her mouth, and the whole covey rose into the air. The terrific height to which they flew up took the frog’s breath away. Besides which, the ducks did not fly evenly, and kept giving the twig jerks. The poor frog swung in the air like a paper “tumbling tommy,” and hung on by her jaw with all her might, so as not to be thrown off and flop to the ground. However, she soon became accustomed to her surroundings, and even began to look around her. Beneath her fields, meadows, rivers, and mountains passed by in rapid succession, but it was very difficult for her to take stock of them, because, hanging as she was from the twig, she could only see backwards and towards the sky; nevertheless, she managed to see something, and was very pleased and proud with herself.</p>
			<p>“What a splendid idea it was of mine!” she thought to herself.</p>
			<p>And as the rest of the ducks flew along behind the first pair which carried her they cried out to her and praised her.</p>
			<p>“Our frog has an astonishingly clever head,” they said. “It would be difficult to find anything like it even amongst us ducks.”</p>
			<p>The frog could scarcely restrain herself from thanking them, but, remembering that if she opened her mouth she would fall from a terrific height, she closed her jaw still tighter, and decided to resist the temptation. She swung in this manner for a whole day. The ducks who were carrying her relieved each other on the wing, cleverly catching hold of the twig. This was most terrifying. Several times the frog almost croaked from fright, but it was necessary to have plenty of presence of mind, which she possessed. In the evening the whole company halted in a swamp. At dawn the ducks with the frog continued their journey, but this time their passenger, in order to see the better what was happening, fastened on with her back and head to the front. The ducks fiew over mown fields, woods turning yellow, and over villages full of corn-stacks. They could hear the people talking, and the noise of the machines with which they were threshing the rye. The villagers looked at the ducks, and, noticing something strange in their midst, pointed to it. And the frog longed to fly lower down, so as to show herself and to hear what they were saying about her. At the next halt she said:</p>
			<p>“Is it possible for us to fiy not quite so high? It makes my head swim, and I am afraid of falling if I should suddenly feel bad.”</p>
			<p>The kind ducks promised her to fly lower, and the following day they travelled so low that they could hear what was said.</p>
			<p>“Look, look!” cried the children in one of the villages; “the ducks are carrying a frog!”</p>
			<p>The frog heard this, and her heart jumped. “Look, look!” “grown-ups” cried in another village. “That’s an extraordinary thing!”</p>
			<p>“Do they know that it was I who thought of this, and not the ducks?” the frog wondered to herself.</p>
			<p>“Look, look!” they cried in a third village. “What a wonder! And who thought of such a clever dodge?” Thereupon the frog could stand it no longer, and, throwing caution to the winds, cried out at the top of her voice:</p>
			<p>“It was I⁠—I!”</p>
			<p>And with this cry she went tumbling over and over to the ground. The ducks quacked loudly, and one of them tried to catch hold of their unfortunate fellow-traveller as she was falling, but missed her. The frog, frantically waving all four paws, quickly fell to the ground, but as the ducks were flying very fast, she did not fall just at the spot above which she had cried out, and where there was a hard road, but much farther on, which was extremely lucky for her, because she flopped into a muddy pond on the edge of the village.</p>
			<p>She quickly appeared from out of the water, and with all her might began to cry out:</p>
			<p>“It was I⁠—it was I who thought of it!”</p>
			<p>But there was no one near her. The local frogs, frightened by the unexpected splash, had all disappeared under water. When they began to reappear they gazed at the new arrival with astonishment.</p>
			<p>And she related to them a wonderful story of how she had thought all her life about the matter, and had at last invented a new, unusual method of travelling by ducks. How she had her own special ducks which carried her where she wanted to go. How she had been in the beautiful South, where it was so nice, where there are such lovely warm swamps, and such quantities of midges, and every other kind of edible insects.</p>
			<p>“I have come here to see how you live,” she said. “I shall stay with you until the spring, until my ducks, which I have let go, return.”</p>
			<p>But the ducks never returned. They thought that the frog had been smashed to pieces by her fall, and were very sorry for her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
